What advice would you give to the people responsible for that search?
What should they search for?
They need to search for somebody with a high energy level.
This is a hard job.
You see the little pink rabbit on my shelf over there.
My staff members gave me that for my birthday, the first year in here, because
And I appreciated it.
They claimed that they saw me as the pink bunny.
But you need to be.
It's a big workload.
So someone who is energetic and doesn't wear out too easily.
Somebody who's willing to rock a boat now and then.
and somebody who is willing to address the provost and, if necessary, the president forthrightly.
I think it's very important that this job not just be a member of the chain, taking commands and remitting them.
It has never been that, but it's important that it not ever be
allowed to be that.
There have been a couple of occasions when I saw the danger of this or that happening and I made formal appointments with the provost and the president on their schedule and went in and said, I'm here because I need to give you a message.
Should the people they look at most carefully, should they be currently members of the Texas A&M faculty?
I think only current members of Texas A&M faculty should be candidates because you really need the cast of characters and the lay of the land to do this job.
What kind of capability level would you expect?
People need to have an analytical mind.
to read policy statements and translate those into human beings and actual activities.
People need to be not greatly worried about career building and fence mending and making the right friends because you've got to exercise an independent voice here.
Should they have had some administrative experience?
They're going to be eaten alive if they haven't.
What about teaching and or research experience?
I'll tell you, Bill Perry gave me some advice when I was coming in here, which I think is very good advice.
He said it's important for the dean of faculties to be involved in faculty activities, whether teaching or doing scholarship.
But the dean of faculties can't be doing both.
I think that's probably true.
But to have an understanding for it.
Oh, yes, from the past, but I'm sorry, your question was from the past, and I was thinking of more what could be done while holding this role.
Would it be better for them to have been in one of the central academic disciplines of the campus?
The more, shall we say peripheral, that's not good terminology, but I can't think of what to say now.
But the more peripheral the discipline you're in, the harder you're going to have to struggle to understand.
What about the word specialized?
The rest.
That's better.
The more specialized the discipline, the harder it's going to be.
One example here, I came from English.
Well, you know, that's about in the center of the campus, isn't it?
And when I was at Rice, I had dealt with all the disciplines we had at Rice because I was director of graduate programs.
I mean, engineering, business, whatever.
And not many people have been lucky enough to have that.
But when I came in, the first hiring papers I saw in veterinary medicine, where they were going to bring people in for non-tenure track things for two or three years, and then turn on the tenure clock, I said, well,
You can't do that.
You don't just... Well, that's standard in veterinary medicine because the nature of the degree and the board certification they have to have.
Well, I had to learn that.
That's a specific example, but it's one of only many.
There's no one that's going to have all the disciplines.
What kind of health, physical health and energy level?
Well, energy level, as you recall, was the first thing I mentioned when you said, what do I need to do?
I did indeed.
And I think I am a person with an unusually high energy level for my advanced age of 62.
But I have to tell you, I'm tired most of the time.
What about sense of humor?
Boy, you're going to need it.
I've already told you that I think there's a lot of opportunity for sadness in this job.
And maybe I let it get me down too much.
Probably somebody that didn't let it get to them as much would be better off.
All right.
When that person walks in, what should be their key priorities when they take over?
They need to learn personally the people they're going to be working with.
They need to study and restudy the policies that affect faculty and learn where to reach for them to get them.
They need to study the AAUP Red Book if they don't already know it.
We produce the Red Book in our policies, but we're pretty darn close.
And they need to be willing to learn from people and be willing to say, gee whiz, I'm sorry I did that.
I'm new.
I'll learn better next time.
And not to let their ego get involved in it.
You can't know it all coming in.
Who should they go talk to for advice?
I would trust Ann Pittman's advice a lot.
She brings a lot of perspective here, and she has a good mind.
She's not just a carrier out of tasks.
She's a person with a good mind.
Identify a couple of deans or associate deans that you can learn from, people who have experience and people who are known for integrity.
For example, are there some people that if you might pick up the phone and say, I've got a situation, I need, I want to get your feedback, what do you think?
Who would those people be for you?
You just want their opinion.
Yeah, well, I've named a few for you already.
Joe Newton is one and Larry Oliver I named, and I named Julia Blackwelder.
If it involves... What about in the senior administration, higher than those?
Hi, I talk with Mark Weichold a lot.
You know, we're already talking pretty darn senior, aren't we, when I mention a dean or two?
All right, let's see.
Proudest moments for you, happiest moments?
When I carry the university mace, that's a proud and happy moment.
I can really get myself up for ceremonies.
I think rituals are important in the life of any group or institution.
I can really put myself in a frame of mind and really feel it.
I'm not faking it to think, isn't this wonderful?
Isn't this splendid?
To have my hands on the visible manifestation of so much tradition and pride and endeavor.
And aren't I lucky to be the first woman to get to do this?
I think that's a very high moment.
When I met with our minority faculty last summer in those two focus group meetings, and they did me the honor of their candor,
I'm not imagining they told me everything they possibly could have.
Of course not.
Here I sit, a white female, and they shared so much with me.
I felt very moved and honored by that.
And that was a moment of great pride.
A couple of the promotion and tenure cases where it was touch and go.
And I've been able to say, but think about this.
Think about this.
And people have gone back and thought about it.
And faculty members have been promoted or have been kept who might not have been.
Boy, do I like that.
Now, I really feed on that one.
Any truly sad moments?
I was telling you a moment ago about this faculty member and sad moments of people who I've seen mess up their careers in certain ways and powerless to stop it.
Some of the exit interviews I've had when people have laid forth their complaints and I've seen ways in which maybe as an institution we failed them, we didn't.
we didn't nurture their careers as well as we should have.
That has bothered me a whole lot because this is such a wonderful place and nobody's going to hit on all the cylinders all the time but when I see those moments when we're not hitting on them very well that that bothers me a lot.
All right.
I've asked this a little bit already, but what does A&M do best as an institution, and what does it do least well?
I think what we do best is attract really good people here.
Maybe what we do least well is to pay attention to the things that will keep those good people here.
We do real well at attracting early career people who are just stellar in their qualifications and bringing their careers up to the mid-level and they get ripe for the picking and they get picked away.
They need to do better.
Should we do some picking more than we do?
We tend to hire in almost every case,
at junior level.
Most of our hiring is, yeah.
Whereas Ivy League schools and some of the old established great public universities, they hire stars.
Should we?
Yeah, but I don't want to go there.
The reason that they do that is because they wash out their assistant professors over and over, and that's not fair.
Oh, no, but on occasion when we have, let's make believe we have an outstanding faculty member to retire.
Should we sometimes fill some of those with proven scholars?
And we have sometimes, yes.
We do sometimes, and you're right.
There you have to look at the department in question and ask, does it still have senior leadership?
And if the answer is no, it needs senior leadership, and you need to go out for it, yeah.
In terms of our facilities, I'm including library now as facilities, are we making progress?
Library's wonderful.
Library is getting better, much stronger than when I came here.
And its physical facilities are much better.
Fred Heath has done a wonderful job.
Academic buildings in general, we are desperate for space.
We have some places where we have opportunities to make senior hires, and I don't know where we'd put them.
Space is like the last frontier for a university.
I mean, it's the thing that can never be entirely conquered and it's the most difficult of all problems.
My own office space has been a terrible problem.
We struggled and struggled and struggled and finally got a teeny bit of extra space on the third floor behind the elevator.
And if you don't think that's inconvenient, but we were delighted to get it.
The Center for Teaching Excellence desperately needs appropriate space.
And I send Bill Perry, who's now, you know, academic space czar, I send him emails about every two months reminding him about Center for Teaching Excellence.
And we haven't cracked that nut yet, because we don't know where to go.
We're turned.
That's a real problem.
See, one of the blessings when all of us were in the Koch building is that every afternoon at about 530,
Those of us that were the key people in that building, we'd get together and say, what happened today?
What have you heard about?
Here's the problem.
No, we don't have that.
And that doesn't happen anymore.
It does not happen.
We're scattered, and the place is so big, and we are so eaten up with busyness that we don't often do the unstructured sharing.
I wish that were true.
I think we need it.
All right, now, I've only got a little bit more, and what topics have we not touched on that we should have?
Oh, goodness.
You ask such hard questions.
We've talked a little bit about the faculty senate.
What is the senate and faculty governance, is it doing, is it appropriate at its level here?
Well, certainly the structures are appropriate.
I'm sorry to say that I think
There are parts of the university where people are not interested in the faculty senate, don't think it does anything, and don't care to participate.
And that's unfortunate.
The senate would be stronger if people let it be stronger by being part of it.
I guess these things wax and wane.
That's one way.
Should the faculty senate take more responsibility
for dealing with faculty colleagues who are not meeting their classes regularly and who are not living up to their responsibilities?
No.
They shouldn't?
I just don't think that's their role.
Okay.
They're not there to be the disciplinarians or the administrators.
They're there to raise issues.
Okay.
Yeah.
Faculty governance in the sense of the decision making process within departments varies from department to department.
My own predilection is for maximum participation.
Example.
Every professor who has tenure and is an associate professor, say, is theoretically entitled to vote on the assistant professor coming up for tenure in her or his department.
But in some departments, only a small subset vote, a three-person committee or something.
I think everybody who
is of appropriate rank, ought to be enfranchised in all these decisions.
Annual review processes.
In my view, there ought to be a faculty committee, at least partially elected, in every department looking at people's annual reports and making recommendations about the salary decisions.
There are, in some departments,
but not in all, and we don't mandate.
We leave it to local culture.
I would like to see more democratic participation.
In serious personnel decisions within a department, tenure, termination, promotion, should the department administrator, rather called department chairman or department head,
Should they automatically be bound in their recommendation by the majority of the vote of the department?
I think it's working well without that system.
I don't think that's true.
Because we do require pretty elaborate documentation of what the faculty sentiment was.
And if the head goes against that, it's transparently evident.
so we can look at both.
And I think it's okay.
Is that general what she's done all across campus?
Yes, yes.
Okay, you're now, let's see, did we think of any other things that we need
No, I'll think of them after you've gone.
I will say that I'm very happy to have been able to maintain my scholarship while I've been here.
That's been very important to me, and it gives me a sense of identity.
If I'm swallowed up with problems and I'm sitting here thinking, I didn't go to graduate school to do that, if I can look across the room and see my book that was published,
It's also relaxation in a way, isn't it?
Yes, it is.
It's work, but it's a different work.
What are you working on now?
I'm reading proofs on a book that'll come out from University of Nebraska Press at the end of this year, which is a calendar of the letters of Willa Cather, and it's a very detailed, different kind of scholarly thing than I've done before.
I was about to ask why Nebraska Press until you said the subject matter.
That's right.
Do you have a plan for what's next?
I have not only a plan, I have a manuscript partly done.
I'm co-authoring, working on with Alan Houchins in Music, a book on poetry and music of the two world wars, World War I and World War II.
We're especially interested in poems
that were then set to music, poetry that established itself as poetry and was then set to music when the two art forms come together.
I hope you're going to send it to a local press.
I inquired of our press about this project before our present director came and did not receive any expression of interest, whatever.
And I slightly knew an acquisitions editor at TCU and mentioned it to him and were under contract with TCU Press.
I was going to say, if you'd send me a note, I would be delighted to hand it to the...
to the director over there.
I think Mr. Backus would have given me a different reaction.
I believe you're right.
Okay, you've now been hired as a consultant.
What advice would you give to the, as the consultant, to the search committee as they look for the new dean of faculties?
They want a high-energy person.
They want to hear expressions of commitment to diversity that they can believe are not just formulaic but are genuine.
They want a person who is experienced in academia,
and seems secure enough to be able to stand up against carping and criticism and not be just devastated by it.
And a sense of humor helps.
And you know, I guess I must have been solemn today, because in staff meeting and all, I sometimes serve the role of the kind of the group clown or shaker-upper, or I propose that we need more fun around here.
But today, I haven't been able to think of much fun as you and I have talked.
Yeah, people need that.
What advice would you give the provost, whomever it may be, whether it's a current provost or a future provost, about the role of the dean of faculties and about the academic programs in general?
The dean of faculties needs an associate dean of faculties.
The workload is too much.
And I'm not sure exactly how that job should be configured, but I think we need it both to handle
what we need to do and to serve as a developmental opportunity for more people because they're people with the capabilities who think they would like to try out administration but they need entrees into it and a half-time one would be a good way to do it.
So I am going to be
urging that I think that our relations with Galveston can stand clarification and improvement because it is part of us and yet it isn't it's separately budgeted and you know why I'm chuckling don't you
that it has ever been thus.
Chuck McCandless, when he was my right-hand man, he came up with the idea and he said, let us clearly identify it as a college of Texas A&M that its courses interact with ours, but there is one admissions office
You graduate from Texas A&M, and so forth and so on, but that never came down.
No, that's one of those perennial problems.
All right, you're still the consultant now advising the provost about A&M academics in general.
Any advice about academics in general?
No, I don't think so.
The development of the arts is extremely important, but I would advise that it's not something you go into until you've counted the cost.
Because if you go into it without adequate resources, you're not going to be happy with the results.
You're going to divert resources from others who could do well with it, and it will be a botch.
So either have what we need,
and do it well or keep putting off until we can do it well.
All right, now you're, as a consultant, you're advising the president of Texas A&M about the future of this institution.
I know some things I'd say, but I'm not going to tell you what they'd be.
Oh, really?
Okay.
Yeah.
I'm sorry.
Okay.
All right.
What about the chancellor and the regents?
Any advice you'd give them about Texas A&M?
The system is not the university, and we need to keep a clear distinction between them, and I really do believe that.
Usually we do, but sometimes we don't.
Do the regents seem to be well informed about this institution?
We have had wonderful boards of regents the last few years, the best that we've ever had that I know of, and that doesn't mean that I always have known either, but to my limited acquaintance, I think we've had wonderful boards and wonderful chairs for our board the last couple of years.
I've got two or three items to share with you after the term.
Okay.
All right, last question then.
As you drive away headed west, what thoughts about Texas A&M will you carry in your heart?
I am going to be grateful that I was able to come here and do what I think was some good work.
And very few people in this life have the chance to go and exercise
their own initiative, even a little bit, and accomplish something that they think was worth doing.
And there have been times I've been able to do that.
You can't ask for more than that.